It's time to talk about
Comparison Operators in JavaScript.
And here's where we'll see that what we've
been discussing, all these things that
may have felt not very necessary until
now, regarding operators and precedents,
and associativity and
coercion where they all come together.
To explain some behaviors in
JavaScript that many find confusing.
So again I have a blank app.js file,
I'm gonna try some things.
And I encourage you to try these
things yourself in your app.js file or
in the console,
in the dev tools of your browser.
Mess around.
As we discuss,
you'll want to be able to understand and
be familiar with some of the quirks
that we're going to see.
All right, so for example,
I'm going to console.log a statement
that should look pretty obvious.
One is less than two is less than three.
So, as a human,
what would you expect the result to be?
Again, these are less than operator.
So, it's gonna return a boolean.
Either this is true or false.
If I just read this one is less
than two is less than three.
I would expect that to be true,
cuz it is true.
One is less than two and
two is less than three.
So if I run this, it appears that
the browser agrees that JavaScript,
the JavaScript engine inside the browser
ran that statement and agrees with that,
cuz it said true.
All right, let's change this to three
is less than two is less than one.
Well that should be false, right?
Three is not less than two,
two is not less than one.
I run that.
And that's also true.
So why is this returning true?
And for that matter, why did one is less
than two is less than three return true?
Well, we can start to answer this by
using the knowledge we've gained.
About operator precedence and
associativity.
These are two less than operators,
so they have the same precedence.
So what determines which
one gets run first?
Well, associativity.
And if I scroll down and
find the less than operator,
I see that it's left to right
associativity, see that?
That means, the one furthest to
the left will get run first.
So, what does three is
less than two return?
Well, we know that.
If I clear this and go,
three less than two, it returns false.
So That means what's really
happening is that this is being run.
The second operator function,
when it's invoked, is getting passed
the parameters one and false.
And what does an operator
in JavaScript try to do
when I give it a value that's
a type it doesn't expect.
This wants two numbers and
I'm giving it a number and a boolean.
Well it's going to try to coerce or
convert this boolean to a number.
Well what does false become when
I try to convert it to a number?
We can actually see this
if I open up the console.
I'll clear this again.
I can use a built in function.
I recommend that you don't use this but
its very useful to see what
things will coerce to.
However we'll talk about this later
in the course about using these and
not using these built-in functions.
But just to show what something coerces
to, I'm gonna use the number function,
where I can give it a value,
any value, and it will show me what
this will coerce to, because it
will try to convert it to a number.
So if I, for example,
try to coerce the string three I get
a three back as we've talked about.
All right so I'm going to try to
coerce a boolean false into a number.
What does it become?
Zero.
Well that's interesting.
Actually true and false both can
coerce false becomes a zero and
true becomes a one.
So, what does that mean is happening?
Well, over here, when this less
than operator is invoked, and
it coerces false,
it's actually running this statement.
Is zero less than one?
Because it converted the boolean to
a different type to a number, and
that became a zero.
So, is zero less than one?
So this becomes true.
So if I look at the order again,
three is less than two is false.
Left to right associativity,
that was called first.
False is less than one.
False becomes coerced,
so convert it to zero.
Zero is less than one?
That's true.
So this sequence of function calls,
three is less than two is less than one.
Although it looks from
a human perspective,
like it should obviously be false.
From the JavaScript engine's perspective,
which parses and
executes this code,
it makes perfect sense.
That this result would be true
because of the order of execution
of these function operators and
the coercion of the resulting values.
But we can see how not
understanding these things
could lead one to feel that JavaScript is
behaving in a weird or strange manner.
Let's go back to one is less
than two is less than three.
Now that we have a grasp of what's really
happening, we can see that even though
this is returning true, it's not because
it's doing what we're doing as humans.
Looking at that and saying yes,
obviously that's true.
What's actually happening is it's
running this function first because of
left associativity for
the less than operator.
One is less than two is true.
True less than three,
this function operator is invoked.
True is coerced.
Remember what that was.
True becomes a one.
And one is less than three, is true.
And so we get true.
So we see that coercion can cause some,
from a human perspective,
surprising results.
But from the computer's perspective,
from the JavaScript engine,
this makes total sense.
Now, that is to say that not every case is
going to coerce in a way that is expected.
For example, I can coerce false or
true to a number.
I can coerce a string to a number
if that string looks like a number.
But, if I try to coerce, for example,
undefined, I get this special thing.
NaN, which literally means, not a number.
This isn't exactly a primitive type,
but you can basically treat it as such.
Not a number means, I have this thing
that I tried to convert to a number and
it just isn't a number.
There's no way to convert it to a number.
So undefined couldn't convert to a number.
Or null, oh well wait a minute.
Null, JavaScript decides, is a zero.
So you see what's happening?
It isn't always obvious what
a particular type is going to coerce to.
The JavaScript engine decides.
This can cause a lot of strange bugs and
odd problems if you don't
understand again what's going on.
You can believe that undefined and
null are going to behave the same way,
but they won't.
So while coercion is very powerful,
it can also be dangerous,
So wouldn't it be nice if we had
a way to not coerce under a certain,
very common circumstance?
That is checking if two things are equal.
Well, we do.
Let's pull up our JavaScript
Operator Precedence table again.
All right,
I'm going to scroll down to find something
very common in programming languages.
Equality.
It's a double equals.
Meaning, are two things equal?
We often put this in if statements.
If something equals something else.
So, if I open up my browser and
clear this.
It might be something
like three equals three.
This is an operator and
it returns true or false.
True.
If I pass it the string three and
three, very much like those
operators that we've seen, the doubles
equal operator coerce the types.
It expects two of the same type and
if they're not, it will make a choice.
True.
It coerced one type and
then checked equality.
But again we saw that this
can be a little strange.
This can cause some strange side effects.
For example, if I clear this,
we know that false
when converted to a number
when coerced becomes a zero.
So that means false double
equals zero is true.
Strange, right?
That means var a equals false.
I have a variable that's a bullion.
And if I check if a is zero, it says
yes a is zero, because of coercion.
This can cause those kind of strange
problems that are hard to debug.
Or, I already said false equals zero,
that's true.
How about null equals zero?
Remember null also coerces
to zero as a number.
Oh, but that's false.
So, there are special cases,
like undefined and
null, that don't do what you would expect.
False equals zero.
Yes, but null, although it coerces
to zero under other circumstances,
like null is less than 1,
it doesn't coerce to zero for comparison.
This causes all sorts of confusion and
problems.
And is actually considered
a negative part of the language,
in that comparison operators,
especially double equals causes
strange errors because of unexpected
ways in which it behaves.
I'll show you another one.
Double equals using
an empty string and zero, that's true.
So if I have empty string and
false, that's also true.
You see the problem,
it makes some sense because it's
attempting to convert these
values to the same time.
But it can make your code
very difficult to anticipate
as far as what's going to happen.
So how do we solve this.
Well, we'll go back to our
operator precedence table, and
we saw the double equals,
which is equality.
But there's also a triple equals,
which is called strict equality.
And the same there's regular inequality,
not equal, using the exclamation mark.
And there's strict inequality, not equal,
using an exclamation mark and
a double equals.
So when people see these triple equals for
the first time, especially if coming
from another programming language.
The first response is what
in the world is that?
That is going to save your life.
Strict inequality,
the triple equals compares two things,
it's a standard operator, but
doesn't try to coerce the values.
If the two values are not the same type,
it just says no,
they're not equal and returns false.
So, if I clear this,
three triple equals three is
true because those are both numeric.
Three triple equals three the strings,
also true,
because they're the same value and
they're both strings.
But three the string triple equals
three the number, is false.
The triple equals,
built in operator function,
says those two things are a different
type, so they're not equal.
So using the triple equals will prevent us
from having some odd
potential errors in our code.
When comparing values.
So if I go back to my code, I'm gonna
shrink down the font size just a bit.
And let's say I had a variable
a which is a zero a number,
variable b which is false.
The Boolean, two primitive types.
And I say if double equals right here,
if a double equals b,
I'll do an else and then I'll say
console Dot.log, they are equal.
Then I might say console.log,
nope, not equal.
If I use the double equals,
these two values will be converted or
coerced to the same value and
I get, they are equal.
If I use the triple equals because they're
different types I get nope, not equal.
So what's the lesson?
First of all, in general,
try to do comparison against things
in your code that you know
will be the same type.
And in general,
I would say 99% of the time.
Use triple equals when
making equality comparisons.
Don't use double equals
unless you explicitly.
Unless you consciously want
to coerce the two values, you should
start right now if you haven't already.
Start using triple equals
in your code by default.
That's your initial go
to equality comparer.
And use double equals
only if you are aware of
the implications and
that's what you want to have happen.
And of course,
you can also use the strict inequality
which is not than the double equals.
So, regular inequality not equal
If I put a is not equal to b,
and I said they are not equal,
that happens.
Otherwise I'd say equal.
Then because this coerces the two values.
Same thing, that get's equal.
This was false,
this are they not equal was false, but
the double, the strict inequality,
does what I would expect.
They are not equal.
So when you see these values,
don't get overly confused or concerned
because we've learned what operators are.
They're just functions.
This would be as if I had
a function double equals which
took a couple of parameters,
and this one coerced, and
add a function triple equals and it took
two parameters, and this one didn't.
They're just two different functions.
That behave differently.
And as it turns out in production code,
in the real world,
it's generally better to use this one.
That said it would be nice to
at least have a reference for
what's going to happen in these cases.
There's a really nice link, again,
over on the Mozilla Developer Network.
www.developer.mozilla.org called
equality comparisons and
sameness, and it talks all about this.
And it has, at the bottom,
a really nice sameness comparison
table showing what happens when
you compare two different types of values
using double equals, the triple equals.
And something new that's coming in
the next version of JavaScript called
Object.is, which is even a bit better.
I've taken the liberty of converting
this to a PDF document for
you, and it's attached to this lecture.
But you can just go to
the website if you like and
look up the this Equality Comparison and
Sameness Table.
And you can see for example that zero and
false are when compared with
double equals, that's true.
They're considered the same thing but
with triple equals that's false.
With object that is.
That's false, and you can see that there
are cases where its true across
the board as its suppose to be.
The object.is and the way you use
that is you pass the two values to
the is function, object.is, so
it isn't treated like an operator.
A positive 0 and a negative 0,
although they would appear to be
the same thing, are treated differently.
So you can look at this table and
get some idea.
Of what the expected results would be,
depending on the values
that you're dealing with.
But that doesn't change the fact that, for
right now especially,
triple equals is your best option.
All right, so we've talked about operators
and precedents and associativity.
Comparison and coercion.
And we've seen how coercion can be bad.
But, let's talk about a case which is used
in many popular JavaScript frameworks and
libraries where coercion
actually is helpful.